Introduction
Health care professionals need to update their skills
regularly and continuing education, or continued professional development (CPD) enables the renewal and updating of skills in health care settings. While we know
about the need for CPD, less is known about how nurses
experience and perceive CPD, and currently, there is no
comprehensive global picture of how nurses view and
experience CPD. A metasynthesis of the qualitative literature on nurses’ experiences of CPD may provide a
basis for planning future CPD interventions more effectively and take advantage of examples from different contexts. This paper is organised in the following way; first
we present the notion of CPD, we then use the United
Kingdom, (UK) as a setting to offer an overview of the
different mechanisms that exist in one specific health
care setting, which may impact engagement with CPD.
We acknowledge that similar mechanisms may exist in
other health care settings and countries too, and identify
the UK context, merely as a way to frame the paper.
Subsequently, we conduct a metasynthesis of the qualitative literature addressing the topic of how CPD is experienced by nurses.
Continued professional development
This section aims to unpack the notion of CPD, which exists in different forms and is driven, in part, by top-down
requirements, but also, bottom-up, from the needs of
practitioners. Continuing professional development (CPD)
programmes are central to nurses’ lifelong learning and
are a vital aspect for keeping nurses’ knowledge and skills
up-to-date. The requirement for nurses to participate in
CPD differs between European countries and elsewhere in
the world and can be mandatory or voluntary [1, 2]. For
example, CPD is mandatory in the U. K, Belgium, Spain,
Australia and in some states in the United States of America, [2–4]. In these countries, nurses engage in CPD because it is a mandatory condition by nurse regulators for
remaining registered to practice. However, in Sweden,
Netherlands and Ireland nurses participate in CPD of their
own volition [1, 3–5]. Table 1 provides an overview of
some of the European countries which provide mandatory
and non-mandatory CPD.
In jurisdictions where CPD is mandatory, nurses engage in continuing education by participating in professional development that is relevant to their areas of
practice. Mandatory CPD, refers to “… the process of
ongoing education and development of healthcare professionals, from initial qualifying education and for the
duration of professional life, in order to maintain competence to practice and increase professional proficiency
and expertise” ([6], p.1). CPD can sometimes refer to a
learning framework and activities of professional development which contribute to the continual professional
effectiveness and competence [7]. Broadly, CPD is related to continuing education, and continual learning,
both formal and informal, which results in the acquisition of knowledge and skills transfer by the practising
nurse with the aim of maintaining licensure and competent practice [8]. Learners can utilise a mixed style approach to learning depending on the circumstances and
context of the learning environment [9–11]. To succeed
in providing comprehensive care for their patients,
nurses need to utilise the best evidence available to them
[12–14]. This requires different modes of learning and
ways of knowledge acquisition and construction. To
achieve this, nurses can engage in different approaches
of acquiring knowledge through CPD, through formal
learning, courses or workshops as well as workplace informal learning, through self-reflection, appraising literature for best evidence through journal clubs and giving
feedback to each other [5, 7, 15]. Informal learning is
often volitional and is largely initiated and controlled by
individual nurses with the intention to develop their
knowledge and skills [16–18]. Due to its unstructured
and, at times, unintentional manner, such learning is
often acquired during interactions with colleagues and
patients [19]. One of the advantages of on-site learning,
both formal and informal is that learners can utilise expertise which are already available on the ward [5, 15].
On-site learning occurs often at the discretion and the
willingness of managers to facilitate by providing time
and space for learning to occur within the clinical areas.
Even so, the fact remains that informal on-site learning
is not an event but a continuous process, which draws
from daily professional experiences. Lack of CPD trained
nurses and ward needs, coupled with poor staffing levels,
are cited as main barriers to informal workplace learning
[5, 15]. Evidence from CPD literature indicates that
many nurses prefer informal work-based methods of
learning, noting that most meaningful learning occurs
through interactions with their colleagues [20]. From a
study by Clarke [21], it was noted that nurses found informal learning methods such as supervision, attending
team meetings/briefings, mentoring and observations to
be important. Ultimately, whichever delivery method is
used for CPD, continuous professional development extends the practitioner’s professional ability beyond preregistration training, qualification and induction, thereby
potentially enhancing the practitioner’s practice.
Continued professional development: the UK example
This next section aims to illustrate the different mechanisms that arise in one specific health care setting when
implementing CPD on a national scale. We recognise
that other mechanisms will exist in other contexts, and
in places where CPD is not a formal requirement.
Today, nurses in the U.K. are required to engage in
continuous learning in order to maintain competence as
a means of keeping their licensure with their professional body, the Nursing & Midwifery Council (NMC)
[22]. Since the 1980s, UK nurses and other allied health
care professionals such as physiotherapists and occupational therapists have been required to engage in continuous professional development [23]. A justification
for CPD has been the need to maintain professional
registration to practice. For registered nurses in the UK,
the requirement to engage in CPD came to the fore of
continuing education in 1995. It was introduced by the
then licensing body, the United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting (UKCC)
as post registration education and practice (PREP) [24].
Further to that, the Agenda for Change Reforms in 2003
introduced a system for linking pay and career progression to competency called the National Health Service
Knowledge and Skills Framework [25]. The framework is
linked to the individual nurse’s ability to demonstrate
that they possess the necessary knowledge and skills to
get promoted and be remunerated accordingly [25]. In
the UK, further reforms to CPD were introduced in
2012 through the introduction of the Health Education
England (HEE) in England [27]. Its mandate was to
equip the NHS (National Health Service) workforce, including nurses with appropriate knowledge and skills to
deliver high standard care to patients. The HEE’s role
was to support workforce development by providing
funding largely for nurses’ CPD. In 2016, PREP was replaced with revalidation, which still requires nurses to
attend 35 h of CPD every 3 years [24, 26]. Revalidation is
the process through with nurses and midwives continue
as registrants with the Nursing and Midwifery Council
(NMC) [25]. However, comprehensive HEE budget cuts
have had a negative effect on nurse CPD initiatives [27].
CPD funding in UK was cut from 205 million pounds in
2015–16 to 83 million in 2017–18 [28, 29]. Consequently,
nurses have struggled to fulfil revalidation requirements
due to some authorities freezing access and refusing to
give nurses time to attend CPD activities [27].
This previous section offers an insight into different
push-pull mechanisms, in the UK alone. Statutory requirements are underpinned by the need for nurses to
maintain and develop the knowledge and skills to meet
the expected competence standards of practice in response to expanding nursing roles and global trends.
Our experience suggests that local governing bodies may
enforce similar measures in contexts where CPD measure are not formalised. Nurses may find themselves
caught between a patchwork of statutory requirements
and a need to develop their skills and knowledge. Consequently, while we know about the need for nurses’ continuing professional development, less is known about
how nurses experience and perceive continuing professional development. Therefore we propose that a metasynthesis of the qualitative literature could be a part of
forming such a comprehensive view and use the following three questions to examine the literature What is the
reported value of CPD for nurses’ lifelong learning and
its impact on nursing knowledge?, What are the conditions necessary for CPD?, and, What are the challenges
faced by nurses when engaging in CPD?
Method
In this study, a metasynthesis was used to investigate the
qualitative literature [30, 31]. Metasynthesis is a form of
systematic review method used to review qualitative
studies in order to develop theory, to explore and understand phenomena or generate new knowledge, thereby
creating meaning from that knowledge [32–36]. In this
review, we present a metasynthesis based on the interpretation of qualitative results from topically related
qualitative reports. In doing so we strive towards theoretical development, which according to Zimmer refers to
the synthesis of findings into a product that is ‘thickly
descriptive, and comprehensive’ and thus more complete
than any of the constituent studies alone ( [30] p.313).
The results from metasynthesis studies may be used to
underpin and inform healthcare policy, nursing practice
and patient care. Furthermore, such information can be
utilised by health care professionals involved in nursing
education to inform planning and designing of training
and educational programs. A number of steps are taken
when conducting a metasynthesis [36] and involve;
a) bringing together a multidisciplinary team, in our
case the team of three people includes two skilled medical education professional researchers with extensive experience in qualitative studies, including systematic
reviews, moreover these two authors have more than 40
years of comprehensive experience of CPD in health care
settings, two of the team are registered nurses and afford
the team key insights into the context of nursing CPD,
the team is spread across three institutions in two countries, finally, the team consisted of a search engine
expert,
b) defining inclusive but manageable research questions, see the questions above;
c) conducting the systematic search, in our case this
was conducted by the search engine expert, see Table 2
for the search criteria,
d) quality assessment of the studies, this was done
using the CASP (Critical Appraisal Skills Programme)
criteria, weighting three levels (not met, partially met,
totally met) where assessment was done by all three authors see Table 4, e) extracting data from the studies,
see Table 3,
e) data analysis, which is explained in more detail
below, and.
f) expressing the details of the synthesis which is done
in the findings sections below
Search strategy
A comprehensive systematic search of literature was
subsequently conducted on Medline (OVID), PubMed
and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health
Literature (CINAHL), Web of Science (Clarivate) and
ERIC (ProQuest). The literature search was conducted
by a librarian. The literature search was conducted in
December 2019 and was limited to articles published
in English from 2010 to 2019. Inclusion and exclusion
criteria for the literature search were established and
are presented below in Table 2. The inclusion criteria
comprise of articles from empirical studies (using
qualitative methods), discussing nurse continuing
learning and education, professional development, lifelong learning, CPD, motivation and barriers.
Data analysis
A total of 1675 records were identified, and following
de-duplication, 1395 articles remained. All 1395 articles
were screened. Articles had to address nurses’ CPD and
continuing education, using qualitative oriented
methods. After the first screening 72 articles remained.
These articles were divided into three batches and were
divided among the researchers. Each author read one
batch to further identify if the articles were to be included. For each batch, a second author read the articles,
meaning all articles were read by at least two authors.
Any remaining ambiguities were discussed and resolved
among the team. Figure 1 is a summary of the literature
search and screening and Table 3 presents an overview
of each study with its citation, location, cohort size and
data collection method. 25 articles were identified for
the final metasynthesis. All authors read the final 25 articles. Quality assessment using CASP criteria as outlined
by Lachal et al., [36] is reported in Table 4. In the quality
assessment we assess the following components; Was
there a clear statement of the aims of the research?, Is a
qualitative methodology appropriate?, Was the research
design appropriate to address the aims of the research?,
Was the recruitment strategy appropriate to the aims of
the research?, Were the data collected in a way that addressed the research issue?, Has the relationship between
researcher and participants been adequately considered
and reported?, Have ethical issues been taken into consideration?, Is there a clear statement of findings? We
also introduce the question of whether the texts are
available in Open Access form or not. We introduce this
question, as we believe the outcomes on research on
nurses’ perceptions and experiences of CPD is potentially important for their practice, and access via Open
Access channels could act as a quality dimension. However, without access to the data and the process of
interpretation we choose not to assess; How valuable is
the research?, Was the data analysis sufficiently
rigorous?
For the final analysis enabling the synthesis of the
studies in this metasynthesis the articles were read carefully, findings related to the research questions; What is
the reported value of CPD for nurses’ lifelong learning
and its impact on nursing knowledge?, what are the conditions necessary for CPD? And what are the challenges
faced by nurses when engaging in CPD?, were identified.
In the next step of the analysis, study findings were examined using constant comparative analysis. The findings and conceptual categories were coded, compared,
and sorted, focusing on conditions, strategies, and consequences. Finally, the synthesis, the interpretation of
the findings, were described as themes, and these were
revised several times until a coherent whole was formed
[30, 36–38] Before the final description of the synthesized themes, all the three authors discussed the content
of the themes until consensus concerning credibility was
reached.
Findings
From the metasynthesis we present five overarching
themes, Organisational culture shapes the conditions,
Supportive environment as a prerequisite, Attitudes and
motivation reflect nurse’s professional values, Nurses’
perceptions of barriers and Perceived impact on practice
as a core value. Each theme is further explained below
with references to the relevant literature.
Organisational culture shapes the conditions
Organisational culture played an important role towards
the professional development of staff. Organisational
commitment and support to personal and professional
development of its staff was seen as an indication that
staff were valued [5, 15] Moreover, CPD initiatives contributed to attracting and retaining staff [39]. Additionally, a culture that was flexible and adaptable to change
was perceived by some participants to be favourable
towards CPD [40–42]. Flexibility extends to matters
such as CPD availability, and also location, but related
also to creating opportunities in the work schedule for
the nurses to participate [43]. Other organisational factors such as funding for CPD programs, staff access of
CPD learning, role of management in staff CPD, manageable nursing workloads, the design & delivery of CPD
activities, communication and collaboration between
CPD providers and management are specifically organisational factors seen as crucial to effective staff development [44, 45]. Developing a strategy for CPD was also
acknowledged as a key element of organisational culture
as a way of enabling participation [46]. In a similar fashion, it was argued that the organisation needs to be focussed on incremental, but constant development of
practices, and here CPD was seen to play a key role [47].
This sentiment was expressed elsewhere too, but from a
re-skilling, or keeping up-to-date perspective, where the
organisation is seen to have great importance [48, 49].
The value of partnerships and shared understanding between managers and nurses as key enabling factors was
identified in several studies [46, 50]. In a related fashion,
Jantzen argues that organisations should actively avoid
fragmentation of CPD initiatives [51]. As more CPD
training is digitised IT/ICT (information communication
technology) skills were seen as key to successful CPD
implementation [46, 52]. It was acknowledged that the
transformation to online learning does not only affect
nurses, it involves change for the whole department [52].
Supportive environment as a prerequisite
An environment that supports learning was seen as a necessary prerequisite for CPD. Conditions had to include,
flexible off-duty patterns to allow time for staff to study,
availability of workplace learning, workloads were not
excessive and CPD was fully funded or a shared responsibility between employer and staff [46, 52]. Other indicators of a supportive environment included staff access
to different CPD activities relevant to their career goals,
while at the same time meeting organisational goals and
where staff felt free to study openly and not secretively
[15, 41]. Moreover, the development of local and contextual CPD was seen as something that supported and
made participation possible [43, 53, 54]. Participants indicated that nurses required financial support and practical support in the form of adequate time to participate
in CPD activities and suitable staff cover when colleagues were away attending CPD activities [47]. Jantzen
et al. [51] suggest there are three catalysts in a supportive environment; mentors, workplace camaraderie and a
highly functional workplace team. Moral support or encouragement was identified in more than one study,
where it was articulated that learners want to know
there is an appreciation for the time and dedication
needed to engage in CPD [44, 46, 50]. The value of
learning from other health professionals other than
nurses, in the day-to-day work was highlighted for professional development [54]. Similarly, the sense of a supportive environment with a strong team spirit is
communicated elsewhere [39]. Explicit support is noted
in several studies; support for novice nurses [39] but also
the importance of explicit managerial support [55]. Conversely, in one study, respondents noted that there was
less support for experienced or late career nurses [56].
Attitudes and motivation reflect nurse’s professional
values
The value and importance of CPD was discussed in
many of the studies. In some, CPD was perceived to be
key in defining nurse professionalism [6, 15, 40, 47, 49].
Engaging in CPD was also viewed by new nurse graduates as an important element of their individual professionalisation in nursing [6, 15, 40]. In addition, CPD was
perceived to be important for enhancing and up or reskilling, keeping knowledge and skills up-to-date, considering that nursing practice has become more evidence
based [6, 43, 46, 51, 54, 56]. Furthermore, nurses stated
that CPD was important for maintaining licensure, and
felt that the responsibility for enrolling and participating
in CPD activities was with the individual nurse, not with
the employing organisations [53]. On the other hand,
participants felt more motivated to learn if they could
easily access CPD programs, if they felt supported and if
there were a variety of CPD activities on offer. Here,
bedside and informal learning was emphasized as important [57]. Similarly, contextualising learning and placing it in close proximity to practice was seen to
enhance motivation and engagement [42]. CPD was also
viewed as a way to start networking with other peers
[44]. In one study, a competency framework was introduced, here participants felt that such a framework
could help them reflect on their own practice and, as it
provides a systematic approach to assessing a patient,
look at their own strengths and weaknesses [58]. Such
competency frameworks help to harness scarce training
more effectively and encourage individuals to take more
responsibility for their own development [58].
Participants’ attitudes towards CPD funding were
mixed, with some stating that funding for CPD was the
employer’s responsibility, while others felt that the individual practitioner was responsible or that the burden
ought to be shared between the organisation and the
nurse [5, 15, 40].
Nurses’ perceptions of barriers
Poor staffing levels, heavy workloads, lack of funding,
lack of study time and anti-intellectualism were some of
the perceived barriers to CPD brought out by this
Mlambo et al. BMC Nursing (2021) 20:62 Page 8 of 13
review. Participants in the studies reviewed felt that a
lack of organisational support, especially from their
managers, was an indication that the organisation did
not take professional development of its staff seriously
[46]. Some respondents reasoned that an anti-academic
culture and lack of relevant CPD programs was further
indication of this [5, 15, 40]. Seeing a connection to patient care was identified as a strong driver and nurses
identified that CPD initiatives would be filtered out unless there was such a clear connection to patient care
[43, 51].
Additionally, some studies indicated that as role
models, managers had to show interest in their own
CPD, in order to motivate other nurses. In other words,
the manager’s knowledge of CPD activities was reflected
by their attitude towards work-based study, acceptance
of staff who studied openly, the way the manager prioritised funding support and managed staff shift schedules
to allow study release time [5, 39, 54, 56]. Fatigue was
identified as a major barrier. For example in Jho et al.
[53], in a context of mandated CPD, respondents felt
tired due to the heavy nursing workload in conjunction
with CPD. Lack of strategy, and financial initiatives in
terms of money, or time off to study was also acknowledged as a barrier [5, 39, 54, 56]. Lack of transparent
career trajectories were also acknowledged as an area of
concern [44].
Other barriers, or de-motivating factors were identified; difficulties in attending CPD and keeping a lifework balance [48]. Barriers included: formal CPD
courses away from the clinical areas were perceived to
lack in authenticity [47, 49] and a mis-match in expectations and outputs, where nurses viewed themselves as
agents of change, but where the organisation was unable
to offer means to capitalise on this perception and desire
to bring about change [50, 59]. As much as competency
frameworks were viewed positively in offering a sense of
direction, a divergent view was that they were limiting
or created set boundaries that participants experienced
as limited, for example, if used as prescriptive, hindering
nurses to define their own learning needs [58]. Lack of
IT competence was also perceived as a barrier [52] with
more CPD being conducted online.
Perceived impact on practice as a core value
The impact of CPD on nursing practice was perceived as
important and valuable in different ways. The impact
could be both direct and indirect depending on the organisational culture [41, 45]. This mixed perception
could be due to the complex nature of health care organisations which can make knowledge sharing difficult
[45] and that some CPD learning was done secretly, results of which were difficult to evaluate [41]. In the case
where a competency framework was studied,
participants felt that using the competency framework
helped them organise their work and their thought processes [58]. A common sentiment was that CPD would
benefit health care organisation through the provision
and enhancement of practitioners’ knowledge and skills
[46]. Sentiments articulating expectations of an impact
of CPD could also be seen elsewhere too [52, 55, 56, 60].
Moreover, CPD is expected to rely on better communication between managers and nurses as a way of informing each other about needs and means of fulfilling those
needs [48]. Direct impact was realised through improved
interprofessional collaboration and the idea that new
methods could be directly translated into practice [47].
Others however, raised concerns that CPD programmes
or courses may not translate into new practices [50].
This sentiment was echoed elsewhere too, where a need
to situate CPD in close proximity of patients was seen as
important for CPD to impact practice [49] While indirect impact happened through dissemination of knowledge and skills from CPD learning to other nurses at
ward level, arguments were put forward that there will
be no difference to practice unless organisational processes support and evaluate its effect on practice [46].
Participants reported that their professional confidence
was enhanced, they felt they could challenge medical decisions and the status quo [41]. Furthermore, participants felt that CPD enhanced their professional
knowledge and skills for better patient care through improved care standards, how they communicated and collaborated with other professionals. Participants also
believed that learning increased their chances for career
progression and reduced work-related anxiety because of
enhanced knowledge [40, 41].
Discussion
The aim of this paper is to conduct a metasynthesis investigating the qualitative research on nurses’ experiences of continued professional development. As a
result, this metasynthesis revealed a number of overarching themes, which synthesize the findings of previous
qualitative oriented research during the period 2010–
2019. 2010 was chosen to include the last 10 years of
CPD research. The themes are; Organisational culture
shapes the conditions, Supportive environment as a prerequisite, Attitudes and motivation reflect nurse’s professional values, Nurses’ perceptions of barriers and
Perceived impact on practice as a core value. The
themes put focus on important issues that were recurrently put forward by the nurses in the studies reviewed.
However, the themes are not isolated from each other,
rather, the content of the themes is interrelated. Some of
the themes mainly mirror an overarching perspective at
the organisational level of health care, while other
themes describe the nurses’ experiences and needs on a
Mlambo et al. BMC Nursing (2021) 20:62 Page 9 of 13
personal level. The following discussion explores the
above themes in relation to the three questions posed
earlier; what is the reported value of CPD for nurses’
lifelong learning and its impact on nursing knowledge?
What are the conditions necessary for CPD? What are
the challenges faced by nurses when engaging in CPD?
While we acknowledge that the questions and themes
overlap, we have endeavoured to frame the discussion
around the three research questions individually.
What is the reported value of CPD for nurses’ lifelong
learning and its impact on nursing knowledge?
Nurses reported that CPD raises professional standards through competencies gained, thereby increasing professional performance with positive benefits for
patients, organisations and individual nurses [40].
These outcomes were seen most prominently in the
themes Attitudes and motivation reflect nurse’s professional values, and Perceived impact on practice as
a core value. Closely aligned to CPD are the nurses’
clinical effectiveness and competence. Maintaining
both requires nurses to keep their practice up-to-date
highlighting the importance of CPD for nurses. The
knowledge and skills gained by nurses through CPD
advances the professional status of nursing, which
was an idea that was prevalent in some of the studies
in this review [15, 40, 47, 50], but is also illustrated
elsewhere in the literature [8, 21]. Nurses acknowledged that expectations of professional accountability
meant that standards of practice ought to be kept
high in order to pass public scrutiny [15, 40]. Furthermore, skills acquired through CPD, such as the
ability to conduct systematic peer-reviews [45] and
appraise literature for best evidence, provide nurses
with essential professional competencies, embeds
values such as caring behaviours, influences beliefs
and attitudes which in turn shape nurses’ professional
conduct [61]. As such CPD is seen as a tool for
nurses to update their skills, and in doing so deliver
safe and high-quality health care. As revealed in this
review, nurses were willing to fully fund or part-fund
their CPD as long as CPD programs were captivating,
easily accessible, there was fair allocation of study
time and their efforts towards CPD were recognised.
The latter implies that nurses want time and space to
transfer their CPD learning into practice and for their
CPD to be recorded [5, 45]. The belief is that, consequently, patient care will improve with positive impact from organisational change [15, 45]. However, it
is clear that the organisation is key in making CPD
work for nurses. The issues brought up in the theme
organisational culture shapes the conditions is thus
very important in stimulating nurses to engage in
CPD. The nurses’ attitudes and motivation to engage
in CPD also depends on a supportive environment
and engagement may in turn influence the organisational culture.
What are the conditions necessary for CPD?
A disconnect could be seen in relation to the conditions
for CPD, where access to CPD training came to the fore
as problematic in some of the studies. Nurses had to
travel long distances to attend courses [15, 62, 63]. To
avoid these challenges, nurses settle for CPD as long as
it fulfils mandatory requirements for registration [53]. If
intentions of CPD are to provide a basis for the continual updating of skills, then authentic learning as an expected outcome is seen as a prerequisite for nurses to
engage in CPD, whether it occurs at the bedside, at a
training facility or through an IT mediated interaction.
This calls for accessible CPD, improved design and delivery methods for all nurses [52]. Nurses’ experiences
described in the themes Organisational culture shapes
the conditions, Supportive environment as a prerequisite, show that structural and moral support are both important. Structural support in the form of availability,
time to engage in CPD, as well as clear expected outcomes [46, 49], but also moral support in the form of an
understanding management and environment, and also
peers and leaders who themselves also prioritise CPD
[58]. Organisational support and commitment towards
CPD should mean allocation of study time, support of
nurses who study privately, by creating space for knowledge and skills integration and managing poor cultural
practices that hinder open study. Funding is seen as a
key factor across many of the studies, both in terms of
enabling nurses to participate, but also as a way of acknowledging nurses who engage in CPD. Further studies
may need to look more closely at how nurses perceive
different aspects of funding. For nurses’ lifelong learning
to endure, CPD programs need to be more accessible
and kept interesting by making them more relevant to
nurses’ practice contexts. Here the importance of the organisation for creating a CPD conducive environment is
emphasized [46, 51, 52]. As role models, managers need
to lead by example and engage in CPD themselves, but
also demonstrate explicit support. They also need to influence policy to create environments conducive to
CPD. If funding situations do not improve, work-based
CPD learning could be one of the alternative ways of
CPD delivery for nurses. To promote CPD engagement
and cost reduction, eLearning approaches could be utilised for education and training. However, poor IT skills
among nurses, but also within organisations continues
to be a potential weakness [52]. A challenge remains
here in enabling nurses to get recognition from informal
on-site learning [16–18], where elements of metaMlambo et al. BMC Nursing (2021) 20:62 Page 10 of 13
cognitive reflection can be used to acknowledge nurses’
continued professional development.
What are the challenges faced by nurses when engaging
in CPD?
In some of the literature reviewed, participants lamented
their current conditions for CPD, and identified clear
barriers and challenges in the form of concerns related
to lack of funding for CPD, staffing levels, time allocation for study, lack of organisational support because of
negative cultural practices, CPD design & delivery and
limited choice of CPD activities. This is articulated
within the themes: Organisational culture shapes the
conditions, Supportive environment as a prerequisite,
Nurses’ perceptions of barriers [2, 11, 34, 41] . However,
studies did not explore the views of nurses on recruitment and retention and its impact on accessing a variety
of CPD activities. Evidence from this review indicates
that modernising healthcare and simultaneously cutting
CPD funding for nurses could lead to a limited number
of nurses attaining the skills and competences needed
for the modernisation process. In view of the understaffing that is reported elsewhere [5, 15], we identify a cause
for concern. These perceived barriers may undermine
nurses’ professional development [23, 59]. Moreover, the
findings presented here revealed that nurses face a number of challenges in relation to their CPD participation.
The challenges include limited CPD activities to choose
from, poor CPD delivery methods, negative organisational culture practices such as anti-intellectualism and
lack of support. As a result, nurses were less motivated
to participate in CPD training [57].
It is clear from the review, that IT concerns are becoming more and more prominent, given that more
CPD programmes are being offered through digital platforms [47]. This is a concern for both the individual
nurses, but also their organisations. On concerns regarding CPD delivery methods, nurses indicated that they
preferred different styles. With these concerns comes
the view that learners learn in different ways depending
on the context and subject of study [61, 62]. This supports the notion that individuals have different learning
preferences [61], where some adult learners learn better
in a structured and teacher guided context, while others
prefer self-direction.
Limitations
The search was conducted by an experienced search engine expert. Even so, we may still have been unsuccessful
in finding all the relevant articles. The study was focussed
on qualitative studies, which means that studies using predominantly quantitative or mixed methods were not included, but could hold important insights. In the
introduction to the study we used the UK as an example
for how CPD might be regulated. However, we have conducted a comprehensive search of the literature and our
analysis was not conducted with a UK-centric perspective.
While each study needs to be understood in terms of local
rules and regulations, the similarities in the findings are
striking.
Conclusion
The metasynthesis indicates that differences exist between
the nurses’ CPD needs and expectations and organisations’ approaches to nurses’ professional development.
The review lays bare a disconnect between the rhetoric of
identifying CPD as a way to enhance nurses’ skills, and the
reality of CPD interventions, where nurses do not feel support within their organisations or from their immediate
supervisors. The review also revealed that CPD is an important element of nursing practice and nurses’ lifelong
learning. Furthermore, it suggests that nurses are motivated to take part in CPD to enhance their knowledge, improve skills and keep up- to -date with recent evidence.
While evidence from this review indicates that nurses believe that CPD has a positive impact on patient care, there
is lack of contemporary research to qualify this claim and
there is limited evidence from this review to support this
assumption. However, evidence from the review suggests
and confirms, that the greatest barriers for CPD in nursing
are a lack of funding and time to participate in CPD activities, which are clearly related to organisation structure. It
is difficult to envisage how such conditions could be conducive for nurse CPD to flourish. Such perceived barriers
undermine nurses’ efforts to keep knowledge and skills
up-to-date and provide better patient care while meeting
the ever-changing needs and expectations of their patients. This is further exacerbated by negative organisational cultural practices and lack of knowledge on how to
facilitate, design and deliver CPD for their staff. We conclude that policy makers and relevant stakeholders need
to put in place strategies to support nurse CPD in long
term and in doing so tear down the barriers of CPD.